Add EIP-5753: Lockable Extension for EIP-721 (#5753)
ethereum/EIPs: EIPS/eip-5753.md

---
eip: 5753
title: Lockable Extension for EIP-721
description: Interface for locking and unlocking EIP-721 tokens.
author: Filipp Makarov (@filmakarov)
discussions-to: https://ethereum-magicians.org/t/lockable-nfts-extension/8800
status: Draft
type: Standards Track
category: ERC
created: 2022-10-05
requires: 165, 721
---

## Abstract

> This standard is an extension of [EIP-721](./eip-721.md). It introduces lockable NFTs. The locked asset can be used in any way except selling and/or transferring it. Owner or operator can lock the token. When a token is being locked, the unlocker address (an EOA or a contract) is set. Only unlocker is able to `unlock` the token. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This standard is an extension of [EIP-721](./eip-721.md). It introduces lockable NFTs. The locked asset can be used in any way except by selling and/or transferring it. The owner or operator can lock the token. When a token is locked, the unlocker address (an EOA or a contract) is set. Only the unlocker is able to `unlock` the token. 
```

## Motivation
With NFTs, digital objects become digital goods. Verifiably ownable, easily tradable, immutably stored on the blockchain. However, the usability of NFT presently is quite limited. Existing use cases often have poor UX as they are inherited from fungible tokens world.

> In DeFi you mostly deal with fungible tokens. There is a UX pattern when you lock your tokens on a service smart contract. For example, if you want to borrow some $DAI, you have to provide some $ETH as collateral for a loan. During the loan period $ETH is being locked into the lending service contract. And it's ok for $ETH and other fungible tokens.

Reviewer: Please check the validity of the first statement.

> It's different for NFTs. NFTs have plenty of use cases, that require for the NFT to stay on the holder's wallet even when it is used as collateral for a loan. You may want to keep using your NFT as a verified PFP on Twitter. You may want to use it to authorize on Discord server through Collab.land. You may want to use your NFT in a P2E game. And you should be able to do all of this even during the lending period like you are able to live in your house even it is mortgaged.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
It's different for NFTs. NFTs have plenty of use cases that require the NFT to stay in the holder's wallet even when it is used as collateral for a loan. You may want to keep using your NFT as a verified PFP on Twitter, or use it to authorize a Discord server through collab.land. You may want to use your NFT in a P2E game. And you should be able to do all of this even during the lending period, just like you are able to live in your house even if it is mortgaged.
```

> The initial idea was to just make NFTs that will feature better UX used as collateral. Then it became obvious, that one single locking feature allows for plenty of other use cases, such as:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
There are plenty of other use cases, such as:
```

> * Lending/borrowing NFT without a need for collateral
> * Paying for NFT by installments
> * Safe and convenient usage with hot wallets
> * Non-custodial staking and much more. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion

* Lending/borrowing NFT without a need for collateral
* Paying for NFT by installments
* Safe and convenient usage with hot wallets
* Non-custodial staking and much more. 

```

> Every use case can (and some of them are already) be implemented one at a time. My aim however was to come up with a standardized implementation.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

## Specification
The key words “MUST”, “MUST NOT”, “REQUIRED”, “SHALL”, “SHALL NOT”, “SHOULD”, “SHOULD NOT”, “RECOMMENDED”, “MAY”, and “OPTIONAL” in this document are to be interpreted as described in RFC 2119.

> `ERC-721` compliant contracts MAY implement this ERC to provide standard methods of locking and unlocking the token at it's current owner address. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
EIP-721 compliant contracts MAY implement this EIP to provide standard methods of locking and unlocking the token at its current owner address. 
```

> If the token is locked, the `getLocked` function MUST return an address, that is able to unlock the token.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If the token is locked, the `getLocked` function MUST return an address that is able to unlock the token.
```

> For the tokens that are not locked the `getLocked` function MUST return `address(0)`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For tokens that are not locked, the `getLocked` function MUST return `address(0)`.
```
Why not revert?

> The user MAY permanently lock the token by stating a smart-contract that does not implement interface to `unlock` function as unlocker.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The user MAY permanently lock the token by calling `lock(address(1), tokenId)`.
```

> When the token is locked, all the [EIP-721](./eip-721.md) transfer functions MUST revert, except the msg.sender for the transfer tx is stated as unlocker for this token.

Reviewer: I don't understand the last part of this sentence.

> When the token is locked, [EIP-721](./eip-721.md) `approve` method MUST revert.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When the token is locked, the [EIP-721](./eip-721.md) `approve` method MUST revert.
```
Should all approvals be cleared while the token is locked?

Author: I don't think so. If it is locked without transfer (used as a collateral) we can decide to keep approvals, so when the loan is repaid, there's no need to approve again

Reviewer: I meant that the approvals are set to zero while it's locked, and are reset back to the pre-locked value once it's unlocked.

> When the locked token is transferred by an unlocker, the token MUST be unlocked (unlocker set to `address(0)`) after trasnfer.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When the locked token is transferred by an unlocker, the token MUST be unlocked after the transfer.
```

> Marketplaces that aim to support this standard SHOULD implement method to call `getLocked` method to understand if the token is locked or not. Locked tokens SHOULD NOT be available for listings. Locked tokens listings SHOULD be hidden.  

Author: Thank you for reviewing my proposal!

_1. Marketplaces that aim to support this standard SHOULD implement method to call `getLocked` method to understand if the token is locked or not._

That means, that marketplaces should call `getLocked` method of an EIP-721 Lockable token contract to learn whether a token with a specified tokenId is locked or not.

_2. Locked tokens listings SHOULD be hidden._  

Locked tokens can not be sold. Thus, marketplaces should hide the listing for the tokens that has been locked, because such orders can not be fulfilled.

> Marketplaces that aim to support this standard SHOULD implement method to call `getLocked` method to understand if the token is locked or not. Locked tokens SHOULD NOT be available for listings. Locked tokens listings SHOULD be hidden.  

Reviewer: Please add that. Thanks!

     */
    event Lock (address indexed unlocker, uint256 indexed id);

    /**
     * @dev Emitted when `id` token is unlocked.
     */
    event Unlock (uint256 indexed id);

    /**
     * @dev Locks the `id` token and states `unlocker` wallet as unlocker.
     */
    function lock(address unlocker, uint256 id) external;

    /**
     * @dev Unlocks the `id` token.
     */
    function unlock(uint256 id) external;

    /**
     * @dev Returns the wallet, that is stated as unlocking wallet for the `tokenId` token.
     * If address(0) returned, that means token is not locked. Any other result means token is locked.
     */
    function getLocked(uint256 tokenId) external view returns (address);

}
```

The `supportsInterface` method MUST return `true` when called with `0x72b68110`.

## Rationale

This approach proposes a solution that is designed to be as minimal as possible. At the same time, it is a generalized implementation, that allows for a lot of extensibility and potential use cases. It only allows to lock the item (stating who will be able to unlock it) and unlock it when needed if a user has permission to do it.

> Following use cases are available by just implementing the proposed specification. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The following use cases are enabled:
```

Another approach to the same concept is using locking to provide proof of HODL. You can lock your NFTs from selling as a manifestation of loyalty to the community and start earning rewards for that. It is better version of the rewards mechanism, that was originally introduced by The Hashmasks and their $NCT token. 
- **Safe and convenient co-ownership and co-usage** Extension of safe co-ownership and co-usage. For example, you want to purchase an expensive NFT asset together with friends, but it is not handy to use it with multisig, so you can safely rotate and use it between wallets. The NFT will be stored on one of the co-owners' wallet and he will be able to use it in any way (except transfers) without requiring multi-approval. Transfers will require multi-approval.

> More of use cases may be introduced as soon as the community starts to explore `Lockable` NFTs.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```
Implicit.

## Backwards Compatibility
This standard is compatible with current [EIP-721](./eip-721.md) standards.

## Reference Implementation

> Implementation:

Reviewer: ```suggestion

```

        address to,
        uint256 tokenId
    ) internal virtual override {
        // if it is a Transfer or Burn
        if (from != address(0)) { 
            // token should not be locked or msg.sender should be unlocker to do that
            require(getLocked(tokenId) == address(0) || msg.sender == getLocked(tokenId), "LOCKED");
        }
    }

    function _afterTokenTransfer(
        address from,
        address to,
        uint256 tokenId
    ) internal virtual override {
        // if it is a Transfer or Burn, we always deal with one token, that is startTokenId
        if (from != address(0)) { 
            // clear locks
            delete unlockers[tokenId];
        }
    }

    /*///////////////////////////////////////////////////////////////
                              ERC165 LOGIC
    //////////////////////////////////////////////////////////////*/

    function supportsInterface(bytes4 interfaceId)
        public
        view
        virtual
        override
        returns (bool)
    {
        return
            interfaceId == type(IERC721Lockable).interfaceId ||
            super.supportsInterface(interfaceId);
    }

}
```

## Security Considerations

> The callers of `lock` function should always consider if there's an unlocking function in the contract, that is stated as an unlocker, unless they want to lock the NFT from transfers forever.

Reviewer: This should be rephrased. Also, what if there's a bug that results in the NFT not being able to be unlocked?

Finally, I want to see considerations about MEV, and considerations about reentrancy by malicious EIP-5753 contracts.

---
eip: 5753
title: Lockable Extension for EIP-721
description: Interface for locking and unlocking EIP-721 tokens.
author: Filipp Makarov (@filmakarov)
discussions-to: https://ethereum-magicians.org/t/lockable-nfts-extension/8800
status: Draft
type: Standards Track
category: ERC
created: 2022-10-05
requires: 165, 721
---

## Abstract

> This standard is an extension of [EIP-721](./eip-721.md). It introduces lockable NFTs. The locked asset can be used in any way except by selling and/or transferring it. The owner or operator can lock the token. When a token is locked, the unlocker address (an EOA or a contract) is set. Only the unlocker is able to `unlock` the token. 

Reviewer 2: A high level question: One could choose to support single unlocker or multiple unlockers. Have you considered this possibility?

When the token is locked, the [EIP-721](./eip-721.md) `approve` method MUST revert.
When the token is locked, the [EIP-721](./eip-721.md) `getApproved` method MAY return address(0).
When the locked token is transferred by an unlocker, the token MUST be unlocked after the transfer.

Marketplaces should call `getLocked` method of an EIP-721 Lockable token contract to learn whether a token with a specified tokenId is locked or not. Locked tokens SHOULD NOT be available for listings. Locked tokens can not be sold. Thus, marketplaces SHOULD hide the listing for the tokens that has been locked, because such orders can not be fulfilled.  

### Contract Interface
```solidity
pragma solidity >=0.8.0;

/// @dev Interface for the Lockable extension

interface ILockable {

    /**
     * @dev Emitted when `id` token is locked, and `unlocker` is stated as unlocking wallet.
     */
    event Lock (address indexed unlocker, uint256 indexed id);

    /**
     * @dev Emitted when `id` token is unlocked.
     */
    event Unlock (uint256 indexed id);

    /**

>      * @dev Locks the `id` token and states `unlocker` wallet as unlocker.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
     * @dev Locks the `id` token and gives the `unlocker` address permission to unlock.
```

     */

>     function lock(address unlocker, uint256 id) external;

Reviewer 3: Somewhere in the Specification section, you should mention that a locked token can't be relocked.

Should also clarify the behaviour if `lock` is called with the same `unlocker` while locked.

    /**
     * @dev Unlocks the `id` token.
     */
    function unlock(uint256 id) external;

    /**
     * @dev Returns the wallet, that is stated as unlocking wallet for the `tokenId` token.
     * If address(0) returned, that means token is not locked. Any other result means token is locked.
     */
    function getLocked(uint256 tokenId) external view returns (address);

}
```

The `supportsInterface` method MUST return `true` when called with `0x72b68110`.

> ## Rationale

Reviewer 2: Thanks for this EIP. A high level question: have you considered minimizing the interface. Instead of having both lock/unlock, the alternative for having a single lock function.

```
interface ILockable {
    /**
     * @dev Emitted when `id` token is locked, and `unlocker` is stated as unlocking wallet.
     */
    event Lock (address indexed locker, uint256 indexed id, bool isLocked);

     * @dev Locks the `id` token and states `unlocker` wallet as unlocker.
     */
    function lock(address unlocker, uint256 id, bool isLocked) external;

    function getLocked(uint256 tokenId) external view returns (address);
}
```

- **Metaverse ready** Locking NFT tickets can be useful during huge Metaverse events. That will prevent users, who already logged in with an NFT, from selling it or transferring it to another user. Thus we avoid double usage of one ticket.
- **Non-custodial staking** There are different approaches to non-custodial staking proposed by communities like CyberKongz, Moonbirds and other. Approach suggested in this impementation supposes that the token can only be staked in one place, not several palces at a time (it is like you can not deposit money in two bank accounts simultaneously). Also it doesn't require any additional code and is available with just locking feature.
Another approach to the same concept is using locking to provide proof of HODL. You can lock your NFTs from selling as a manifestation of loyalty to the community and start earning rewards for that. It is better version of the rewards mechanism, that was originally introduced by The Hashmasks and their $NCT token. 

> - **Safe and convenient co-ownership and co-usage** Extension of safe co-ownership and co-usage. For example, you want to purchase an expensive NFT asset together with friends, but it is not handy to use it with multisig, so you can safely rotate and use it between wallets. The NFT will be stored on one of the co-owners' wallet and he will be able to use it in any way (except transfers) without requiring multi-approval. Transfers will require multi-approval.

Reviewer 3: This all reads more like it belongs in the Motivation section. The Rationale section should describe the reasoning behind individual technical choices made in the EIP itself, while the Motivation section explains why the EIP as a whole is necessary.

---
eip: 5753
title: Lockable Extension for EIP-721

> description: Interface for locking tokens from transfer and unlocking them.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
description: Interface for disabling token transfers (locking) and re-enabling them (unlocking).
```

- **Safe and convenient co-ownership and co-usage** Extension of safe co-ownership and co-usage. For example, you want to purchase an expensive NFT asset together with friends, but it is not handy to use it with multisig, so you can safely rotate and use it between wallets. The NFT will be stored on one of the co-owners' wallet and he will be able to use it in any way (except transfers) without requiring multi-approval. Transfers will require multi-approval.

## Specification

The key words “MUST”, “MUST NOT”, “REQUIRED”, “SHALL”, “SHALL NOT”, “SHOULD”, “SHOULD NOT”, “RECOMMENDED”, “MAY”, and “OPTIONAL” in this document are to be interpreted as described in RFC 2119.

EIP-721 compliant contracts MAY implement this EIP to provide standard methods of locking and unlocking the token at its current owner address.
If the token is locked, the `getLocked` function MUST return an address that is able to unlock the token.
For tokens that are not locked, the `getLocked` function MUST return `address(0)`.
The user MAY permanently lock the token by calling `lock(address(1), tokenId)`.

> When the token is locked, all the [EIP-721](./eip-721.md) transfer functions MUST revert, except transaction has been initiated by an unlocker.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
When the token is locked, all the [EIP-721](./eip-721.md) transfer functions MUST revert, except if the transaction has been initiated by an unlocker.
```

When the token is locked, the [EIP-721](./eip-721.md) `approve` method MUST revert for this token.

> When the token is locked, the [EIP-721](./eip-721.md) `getApproved` method SHOULD return `unlocker` address for this token in order for unlocker to be able to transfer this token.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
When the token is locked, the [EIP-721](./eip-721.md) `getApproved` method SHOULD return `unlocker` address for this token so the unlocker is able to transfer this token.
```
